docs/faq.md, before:

# FAQ

## Pipeline initialisation

### Workflow defines configfile config_chip.yml but it is not present or accessible.

This error occurs when the pipeline is run without a config file present in the working directory. Ensure that seqnado-config has been run before starting the pipeline and that you are in the new directory created by seqnado-config.

Follow the [Pipeline Setup](pipeline.md#configuration) instructions to create a config file.


## Singularity configuration

### Workflow Error

Failed to pull singularity image from library://asmith151/seqnado/seqnado_pipeline:latest:  
FATAL: Unable to get library client configuration:  
remote has no library client (see https://apptainer.org/docs/user/latest/endpoint.html#no-default-remote)

Fix:

re-run seqnado-init: [Here](installation.md#seqnado-init)

or

```bash
apptainer remote add --no-login SylabsCloud cloud.sylabs.io  
apptainer remote use SylabsCloud  
```

## Optional configuration

### Can I merge multiple samples into a single sample?

Yes, you can merge multiple samples into a single sample to generate merged bigWig files and consensus peaks. To do this, you need to create a design file that specifies the samples to be merged. The design file should have a column named "merge" that specifies the samples to be merged e.g.:


| sample | r1 | r2 | deseq2 | merge |
|--------|----|----|--------|-------|
| rna1 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna1_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna1_1.fastq.gz | control | control |
| rna2 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna2_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna2_1.fastq.gz | control | control |
| rna3 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna3_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna3_1.fastq.gz | control | control |
| rna4 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna4_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna4_1.fastq.gz | treated | treated |
| rna5 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna5_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna5_1.fastq.gz | treated | treated |
| rna6 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna6_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna6_1.fastq.gz | treated | treated |

Commit message:

Add comprehensive documentation for SeqNado CLI and usage
- Introduced `cli.md` for detailed CLI command reference, including options and usage for `seqnado init`, `genomes`, `config`, `design`, and `pipeline`.
- Created `cluster_config.md` to guide users on running SeqNado on SLURM-based HPC clusters, detailing presets, resource scaling, and GPU support.
- Updated `configuration.md`, `design.md`, `genomes.md`, and `pipeline.md` for improved clarity and to link to the new CLI reference.
- Added `outputs.md` to describe the structure and types of output files generated by SeqNado.
- Enhanced `quick_start.md` with step-by-step instructions and links to relevant documentation.
- Updated `installation.md` and `initialisation.md` for better guidance on setup processes.
- Improved navigation in `mkdocs.yml` for better user experience.
- Updated dependencies in `pyproject.toml` for documentation tools.

docs/faq.md, after:

[← Back to main page](index.md)

# FAQ

## Pipeline initialisation

### Workflow defines configfile config_chip.yml but it is not present or accessible.

This error occurs when the pipeline is run without a config file present in the working directory. Ensure that seqnado-config has been run before starting the pipeline and that you are in the new directory created by seqnado-config.

Follow the [Configuration Guide](configuration.md) instructions to create a config file.


## Singularity configuration

### Workflow Error

Failed to pull singularity image from library://asmith151/seqnado/seqnado_pipeline:latest:  
FATAL: Unable to get library client configuration:  
remote has no library client (see https://apptainer.org/docs/user/latest/endpoint.html#no-default-remote)

Fix:

re-run seqnado init: See the [Initialisation Guide](initialisation.md)

or

```bash
apptainer remote add --no-login SylabsCloud cloud.sylabs.io  
apptainer remote use SylabsCloud  
```

## Optional configuration

### Can I merge multiple samples into a single sample?

Yes, you can merge multiple samples into a single sample to generate merged bigWig files and consensus peaks. To do this, you need to create a design file that specifies the samples to be merged. The design file should have a column named "merge" that specifies the samples to be merged e.g.:


| sample | r1 | r2 | deseq2 | merge |
|--------|----|----|--------|-------|
| rna1 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna1_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna1_1.fastq.gz | control | control |
| rna2 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna2_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna2_1.fastq.gz | control | control |
| rna3 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna3_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna3_1.fastq.gz | control | control |
| rna4 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna4_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna4_1.fastq.gz | treated | treated |
| rna5 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna5_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna5_1.fastq.gz | treated | treated |
| rna6 | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna6_2.fastq.gz | /tmp/pytest-of-asmith/pytest-7/data2/2024-01-13_rna_test/rna6_1.fastq.gz | treated | treated |
