docs/index.md, before:

![Seqnado Logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alsmith151/SeqNado/main/seqnado_logo.jpeg)

Pipeline based on snakemake to process ChIP-seq (with optional spike-in based normalisation), ATAC-seq, RNA-seq and short read WGS data for SNP calling. The defaults are optimised for the Milne group directory on the CCB cluster, but can be easily modified for other groups and clusters.


## Quick Start

### Installation

The [installation](installation.md) page has detailed instructions for installing SeqNado. For a very quick start, run the following command:

```bash
mamba install -c bioconda seqnado
```

### Set up the pipeline

#### Config file

Generate the config file and a working directory for the pipeline:

```bash
seqnado-config [atac|chip|rna|snp]
```

#### Ensure files are in the correct location

Ensure that the fastq files, and design are in the correct location:

```bash
# Fastq files
ln -s /path/to/fastq_files/* /path/to/working-directory/made-by-seqnado-config/fastq/
```

#### Design (optional)

The design will be generated automatically if not provided and the samples follow the correct naming convention.

```bash
cd /path/to/working-directory/made-by-seqnado-config/
seqnado-design [atac|chip|rna|snp]
```

### Run the pipeline

```bash
cd /path/to/working-directory/made-by-seqnado-config/
seqnado [atac|chip|rna|snp] -c <number of cores> --preset [ss|ls] 
# ss = use cluster, ls = use local (not recommended)
# additional options
--queue/-q [short|long] --scale-resource/-s <factor to multiply resources> 

# An actual example would be:
seqnado rna -c 8 --preset ss

```

Commit message:

docs: Update readme and improve docs clarity (#282)
* fix: refine README content for clarity and consistency

* fix: update SeqNado logo image in documentation

* fix: improve documentation clarity and structure in index.md

docs/index.md, after:

# SeqNado

![Seqnado Logo](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/alsmith151/SeqNado/main/containers/seqnado.png)

SeqNado is a Snakemake-based workflow for ChIP-seq (with optional spike-in normalisation), ATAC-seq, RNA-seq, and short-read WGS SNP calling. It is designed to be modular, reproducible, and easy to deploy using Apptainer/Singularity containers. SeqNado provides end-to-end pipelines that take you from raw FASTQ files to publication-ready results with minimal setup.

## Quick Start

Follow the steps below to spin up a working pipeline instance. Consult the [installation](installation.md) page or other docs as needed.

### 1. Install SeqNado

```bash
mamba install -c bioconda seqnado
```

The installation guide covers alternative methods, optional dependencies, and troubleshooting tips.

### 2. Scaffold a working directory

```bash
seqnado-config [atac|chip|rna|snp]
```

This command creates a project directory and the configuration skeleton for the selected pipeline.

### 3. Stage input data

- Place or symlink raw FASTQ files into the generated `fastq/` folder.
- Copy or create any additional resources (e.g., spike-in references) expected by your config.

```bash
ln -s /path/to/fastq/*.fastq.gz /path/to/working-directory/fastq/
```

### 4. (Optional) Supply a design file

If your samples follow SeqNado naming conventions, the design table is generated automatically. Otherwise, run:

```bash
cd /path/to/working-directory
seqnado-design [atac|chip|rna|snp]
```

### 5. Launch the workflow

```bash
cd /path/to/working-directory
seqnado [atac|chip|rna|snp] -c <cores> --preset [ss|ls] \
  --queue/-q [short|long] --scale-resource/-s <factor>

# Example
seqnado rna -c 8 --preset ss
```

Use `--preset ss` to submit jobs to the cluster (recommended) or `--preset ls` for local execution. Adjust `--queue` and `--scale-resource` to fit your environment. Additional usage details, presets, and pipeline-specific parameters are documented in `docs/pipeline.md` and the CLI help (`seqnado --help`).
