docs/installation.md, before:

[Back to Index](index.md)

# Installation

SeqNado can be installed using either `mamba` or `pip`. Follow the steps below to set up the package:

## Prerequisites
Before installing SeqNado, ensure that you have the following tools installed on your system:

- **Mamba/Conda**: Required for managing environments and dependencies. Install Conda from [Miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) or [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/), and then install Mamba:
  ```bash
  conda install -n base -c conda-forge mamba
  ```

- **Pip**: Comes pre-installed with Python. Verify installation:
  ```bash
  pip --version
  ```

If these tools are not installed, follow the links provided to set them up before proceeding with SeqNado installation.

## Install from Bioconda
SeqNado is available on Bioconda. To install:
```bash
mamba install -c bioconda seqnado
```

## Install from PyPI
SeqNado is also available on PyPI. To install:
```bash
pip install seqnado
```

## Next Steps

Once SeqNado is installed continue to: 

[Initialize](initialisation.md)

Commit message:

Fix docs deploy by GitHub actions (#303)
* Add comprehensive documentation for SeqNado CLI and usage

- Introduced `cli.md` for detailed CLI command reference, including options and usage for `seqnado init`, `genomes`, `config`, `design`, and `pipeline`.
- Created `cluster_config.md` to guide users on running SeqNado on SLURM-based HPC clusters, detailing presets, resource scaling, and GPU support.
- Updated `configuration.md`, `design.md`, `genomes.md`, and `pipeline.md` for improved clarity and to link to the new CLI reference.
- Added `outputs.md` to describe the structure and types of output files generated by SeqNado.
- Enhanced `quick_start.md` with step-by-step instructions and links to relevant documentation.
- Updated `installation.md` and `initialisation.md` for better guidance on setup processes.
- Improved navigation in `mkdocs.yml` for better user experience.
- Updated dependencies in `pyproject.toml` for documentation tools.

* ci: update GitHub Actions for documentation build and deployment

docs/installation.md, after:

[← Back to main page](index.md)

# Installation

SeqNado can be installed using either `mamba` or `pip`. Follow the steps below to set up the package:

## Prerequisites
Before installing SeqNado, ensure that you have the following tools installed on your system:

- **Mamba/Conda**: Required for managing environments and dependencies. Install Conda from [Miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html) or [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/), and then install Mamba:
  ```bash
  conda install -n base -c conda-forge mamba
  ```

- **Pip**: Comes pre-installed with Python. Verify installation:
  ```bash
  pip --version
  ```

If these tools are not installed, follow the links provided to set them up before proceeding with SeqNado installation.

## Install from Bioconda
SeqNado is available on Bioconda. To install:
```bash
mamba install -c bioconda seqnado
```

## Install from PyPI
SeqNado is also available on PyPI. To install:
```bash
pip install seqnado
```

## Initialize after install

Once installed, initialize SeqNado in your environment:

```bash
seqnado init
```

For all flags and details, see the CLI reference: [seqnado init](cli.md#cli-seqnado-init).

## Next Steps

Next: **[Initialisation](initialisation.md)**
